---
layout: page
title: FAR 101 Rules and Regulations
tagline: FAR 101 Rules and Interpretation
category: HAB
tags: [HAB, FAA, FAR101]
permalink: /HAB/FAR101.html
---

FAR 101 are the rules that govern High Altitude Balloon flights.  It is strongly recommended that groups looking to do a HAB flight read and understand these rules.  I have copied the rules to this page and I have put some of <font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>my comments in red</font>.  Please understand that the comments are *my opinion* of the rules and regulations.  They are not, *in any way*, an official statement from the FAA, Iowa State University, the Stratospheric Ballooning Association, or Aerodyne Labs.  If you have any questions, you may wish to contact your regional FAA representative.<font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'><span style='line-height:20px'><br/></span></font><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'><span style='line-height:20px'><u>Terminology</u></span></font><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'><span style='line-height:20px'>ATC - Air Traffic Control</span></font><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>FAA - Federal Aviation Administration.  The government agency that controls most airspace.<br/></font><div><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>VOR - VHF Omnidirectional Radio Range.  It is a short range radio navigational system.</font>

* * *

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>Authority: 49 U.S.C. 106(g), 40103, 40113-40114, 45302, 44502, 44514, 44701-44702, 44721,
46308.
</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.1 Sub-part A - General
A.1.1 §101.1 Applicability. </font></p>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(a) This part prescribes rules governing the operation in the United States, of the following: </font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(1) Except as provided for in §101.7, any balloon that is moored to the surface of the earth or an object thereon and that has a diameter of more than 6 feet or a gas capacity of more than 115 cubic feet.</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>

(2) Except as provided for in §101.7, any kite that weighs more than 5 pounds and is intended to be flown at the end of a rope or cable.</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(3) Any amateur rocket except aerial firework displays.<br/>
(4) Except as provided for in §101.7, any unmanned free balloon that-</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(i) Carries a payload package that weighs more than four pounds and has a weight/size ratio of more than three ounces per square inch on any surface of the package, determined by dividing the total weight in ounces of the payload package by the area in square inches of its smallest surface;</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(ii) Carries a payload package that weighs more than six pounds;</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>This is the 6 lb rule.  Basically, except where indicated if you fly a payload that is under six lbs, you are exempt from most FAR 101 rules.  I say most as there are a few rules that apply no matter what you fly.  </font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>There is also the question of what constitutes the payload package.  I count the spacecraft which includes the enclosure, trackers and payload, but I do not count the parachute or balloon.  Some have argued that the transmitter and cutdown are part of the "flight system" and should not count against the weight.  I have found though, that you can do quite a few experiments with 6 lbs including your tracking system weight.  And if you keep your tracking system light, you can still have 4-5 lbs to work with.</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(iii) Carries a payload, of two or more packages, that weighs more than 12 pounds; or</font></p><hr/><p><font color='#ff0000'><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>This is the 12 lbs rule and it is a little vague as a "package" is not well defined.  In my opinion they are referring to two separate payload boxes or containers.  However, anything could really be a "package" and there is nothing to say that the package could be inside the other.  </font></font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(iv) Uses a rope or other device for suspension of the payload that requires an impact force of more than 50 pounds to separate the suspended payload from the balloon. </font></p>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(b) For the purposes of this part, a gyroglider attached to a vehicle on the surface of the
earth is considered to be a kite.
</font></p>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>[Doc. No. 1580, 28 FR 6721, June 29, 1963, as amended by Amdt. 101-1, 29 FR 46, Jan. 3, 1964; Amdt. 101-3, 35 FR 8213, May 26, 1970; Amdt. 101-8, 73 FR 73781, Dec. 4, 2008; 74 FR 38092, July 31, 2009]</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.1.2 §101.3 Waivers.
</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>No person may conduct operations that require a deviation from this part except under a certificate of waiver issued by the Administrator.
</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>[Doc. No. 1580, 28 FR 6721, June 29, 1963]
</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.1.3 §101.5 Operations in prohibited or restricted areas.
</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>No person may operate a moored balloon, kite, amateur rocket, or unmanned free balloon in a prohibited or restricted area unless he has permission from the using or controlling agency, as appropriate.

</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>This one should be obvious, but basically you should not launch or fly if possible in any restricted area and this includes airports.  Many groups however do launch from airports and even military bases, however that is with their express permission.</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>It should also be noted that you should choose your launch location carefully and make sure you have permission to launch from that area unless you specifically own or have rights to that area.  Some groups have launched from "public" areas like parks only to get chased out by the park ranger.  </font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>The same goes for recovery.  It is our policy to always ask for permission from the land owner before going on to their land to recovery your payload(s).  This is just common courtesy and often most people are more than happy to help and are usually curious on what you are doing.</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>[Doc. No. 1457, 29 FR 46, Jan. 3, 1964, as amended at 74 FR 38092, July 31, 2009]</font></p>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.1.4 §101.7 Hazardous operations.</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(a) No person may operate any moored balloon, kite, amateur rocket, or unmanned free balloon in a manner that creates a hazard to other persons, or their property.</font></p>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(b) No person operating any moored balloon, kite, amateur rocket, or unmanned free balloon may allow an object to be dropped therefrom, if such action creates a hazard to other persons or their property.
</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>These two rules allow the FAA to shut down any flight they deem to be dangerous.  </font></p><hr/>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(Sec. 6(c), Department of Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 1655(c)))<br/> [Doc. No. 12800, 39 FR 22252, June 21, 1974, as amended at 74 FR 38092, July 31, 2009] </font></p>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.2 Subpart B-Moored Balloons and Kites </font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>This section is only for tethered balloons.  Most do not do tethered balloons.  If you do, make sure you read up on Subpart B.</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.3 Subpart C- Amateur Rockets</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>Omitted does pertain to HAB Flights</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.4 Subpart D-Unmanned Free Balloons</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>Source: Docket No. 1457, 29 FR 47, Jan. 3, 1964, unless otherwise noted.</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.4.1 §101.31 Applicability.</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>This subpart applies to the operation of unmanned free balloons. However, a person operating an unmanned free balloon within a restricted area must comply only with §101.33 (d) and (e) and with any additional limitations that are imposed by the using or controlling agency, as appropriate.
</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>Remember, generally these rules do not apply unless you are over 6 lbs with a single payload or 12 lbs with 2 or may payloads.  However, some of these rules are good rules to follow no matter what payload you fly.</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.4.2 §101.33 Operating limitations.</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>No person may operate an unmanned free balloon-<br/>
(a) Unless otherwise authorized by ATC, below 2,000 feet above the surface within the lateral boundaries of the surface areas of Class B, Class C, Class D, or Class E airspace designated for
an airport;</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>Basically, do not launch or fly near an airport unless the Air Traffic Controller at that airport has given you permission.</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(b) At any altitude where there are clouds or obscuring phenomena of more than five-tenths
coverage;</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>The 50% rule.  Basically you should fly when the sky is clear.  It is hard to determine if you have "50%" cloud cover, but if the sky is overcast, I would not recommend a flight, even if you are exempt from this rule.</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(c) At any altitude below 60,000 feet standard pressure altitude where the horizontal visibility is less than five miles;</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(d) During the first 1,000 feet of ascent, over a congested area of a city, town, or settlement or an open-air assembly of persons not associated with the operation; or</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>In general, you should try to avoid large cities or metro areas when launching, flying and recovering a HAB flight.  There are a number of flight prediction software packages that can be used to help predict where your payload will end up and you should use these to avoid high population areas as much as possible.</font></p><hr/></div></div></div><div title='Page 37'>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(e) In such a manner that impact of the balloon, or part thereof including its payload, with the surface creates a hazard to persons or property not associated with the operation.</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>[Doc. No. 1457, 29 FR 47, Jan. 3, 1964, as amended by Amdt. 101-5, 56 FR 65662, Dec. 17, 1991]</font></p>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.4.3 §101.35 Equipment and marking requirements.</font></p>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(a) No person may operate an unmanned free balloon unless-<br/>
(1) It is equipped with at least two payload cut-down systems or devices that operate independently of each other;</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(2) At least two methods, systems, devices, or combinations thereof, that function independently of each other, are employed for terminating the flight of the balloon envelope; and</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>We often count the fact that the balloon will burst at a maximum altitude as one form of termination system.  It is often advised to fly a secondary termination system that can cut the payload and parachute away from the balloon by either a command, based on a timer, or based on altitude.</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(3) The balloon envelope is equipped with a radar reflective device(s) or material that will present an echo to surface radar operating in the 200 MHz to 2700 MHz frequency range.</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
The operator shall activate the appropriate devices required by paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of this section when weather conditions are less than those prescribed for operation under this subpart, or if a malfunction or any other reason makes the further operation hazardous to other air traffic or to persons and property on the surface.</font></p><hr/>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>This rule is a little outdated.  Most ATC do not track slow moving objects which makes using a radar reflector often ineffective.  In addition, most ATC are now moving away from radar and are now going to a newer GPS based transponder system to track air traffic (Mode S and ADS-B).  At this time however, there is not a good transponder system that is well suited for HAB flights.</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'> </font><span style='font-family:arial,sans-serif;font-size:medium;background-color:transparent;line-height:1.5'>(b) No person may</span><span style='font-family:arial,sans-serif;font-size:medium;background-color:transparent;line-height:1.5'> operate an unmanned free balloon below 60,000 feet standard pressure altitude between sunset and sunrise (as corrected to the altitude of operation) unless the balloon and its attachments and payload, whether or not they become separated during the operation, are equipped with lights that are visible for at least 5 miles and have a flash frequency of at least 40, and not more than 100, cycles per minute.</span></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>This rule is also a little difficult to follow and is vague.  It is hard to find a device that is rated for 5 miles and even then things such as atmospheric conditions will impact the visibility of the strobe.  Most groups have used Xenon based flashers or ultrabright LEDs with success.</font></p><hr/>

<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(c) No person may operate an unmanned free balloon that is equipped with a trailing antenna that requires an impact force of more than 50 pounds to break it at any point, unless the antenna has coloured pennants or streamers that are attached at not more than 50 foot intervals and that are visible for at least one mile. </font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(d) No person may operate between sunrise and sunset an unmanned free balloon that is equipped with a suspension device (other than a highly conspicuously coloured open parachute) more than 50 feet along, unless the suspension device is colored in alternate bands of high conspicuity colors or has colored pennants or streamers attached which are visible for at least one mile. </font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(Sec. 6(c), Department of Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 1655(c)))</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>[Doc. No. 1457, 29 FR 47, Jan. 3, 1964, as amended by Amdt. 101-2, 32 FR 5254, Mar. 29, 1967; Amdt. 101-4, 39 FR 22252, June 21, 1974]</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.4.4 §101.37 Notice requirements.</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>It is our policy to notify the FAA and local ATCs even if we are exempt from the rules.  This can help groups build a working relationship with their local ATCs and FAA office.  In addition to the notification, we often send status updates at 16,000 ft and 40,000 feet both on the way up and down.  In our case, they have indicated that faxing is the best method.  This may be different for your ATCs, so if you can check with them beforehand.</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(a) Prelaunch notice: Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, no person may operate an unmanned free balloon unless, within 6 to 24 hours before beginning the operation, he gives the following information to the FAA ATC facility that is nearest to the place of intended operation:</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(1) The balloon identification. </font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(2) The estimated date and time of launching, amended as necessary to remain within plus or minus 30 minutes.</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>The time should be in UTC time, not your local time</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(3) The location of the launching site.</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>Please do not just use Lat/Lon, instead you should use the VOR coordinates for your launch and landing.</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(4) The cruising altitude.<br/>
(5) The forecast trajectory and estimated time to cruising altitude or 60,000 feet standard pressure altitude, whichever is lower.</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(6) The length and diameter of the balloon, length of the suspension device, weight of the payload, and length of the trailing antenna.</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(7) The duration of flight.<br/>
(8) The forecast time and location of impact with the surface of the earth.<br/>
(b) For solar or cosmic disturbance investigations involving a critical time element, the information in paragraph (a) of this section shall be given within 30 minutes to 24 hours before
beginning the operation.</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>This is where using a good flight prediction software comes in handy.  Your flight prediction should be able to get you the duration of the flight and the location of landing.  </font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(c) Cancellation notice: If the operation is canceled, the person who intended to conduct the
operation shall immediately notify the nearest FAA ATC facility.</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(d) Launch notice: Each person operating an unmanned free balloon shall notify the nearest FAA or military ATC facility of the launch time immediately after the balloon is launched.</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>A.4.5 §101.39 Balloon position reports.</font></p><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif' color='#ff0000'>Again, the FAA and ATCs do not like Lat/Lon position reports, they want them in VOR.</font></p><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(a) Each person operating an unmanned free balloon shall:<br/>
(1) Unless ATC requires otherwise, monitor the course of the balloon and record its position at least every two hours; and</font></p><hr/><font size='3' color='#ff0000'>It should be noted that you should always track your balloon.  We transmit at 5 second intervals using a 440 MHz frequency.  </font></div><div><hr/><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(2) Forward any balloon position reports requested by ATC.<br/>
(b) One hour before beginning descent, each person operating an unmanned free balloon shall forward to the nearest FAA ATC facility the following information regarding the balloon:</font></p><p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>
(1) The current geographical position.<br/>
(2) The altitude.<br/>
(3) The forecast time of penetration of 60,000 feet standard pressure altitude (if applicable).</font></p>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(4) The forecast trajectory for the balance of the flight.<br/>
(5) The forecast time and location of impact with the surface of the earth.<br/>
(c) If a balloon position report is not recorded for any two-hour period of flight, the person operating an unmanned free balloon shall immediately notify the nearest FAA ATC facility.
The notice shall include the last recorded position and any revision of the forecast trajectory.
The nearest FAA ATC facility shall be notified immediately when tracking of the balloon is
re-established.</font></p><hr/><font size='3' color='#ff0000'>It is always good to have a backup system or plan.  Groups have used several transmitters to "fox hunt" the location of the balloon.  There are also other systems such as the "Spot" system that makes a good backup system.  We actually use a 144.390 APRS tracker that is completely independent of the main system.  This only transmits at 2-3 min. intervals.  </font></div><div><hr/>
<p><font size='3' face='arial, sans-serif'>(d) Each person operating an unmanned free balloon shall notify the nearest FAA ATC
facility when the operation is ended. </font></p><hr/><font size='3' color='#ff0000'>And this is the end of FAA FAR 101.  While FAR 101 governs the flight, always remember that other local, state and federal laws may also apply.  You should not do anything that may harm another person or personal property.  A good example is that you should never be speeding on local roadways to catch up to the balloon.  This is where again, good prediction helps in planning for the flight.  Fly safe, fly smart, and you will have many enjoyable balloon flights.</font>