---
layout: page
title: HAB FAQs
tagline: Frequently Asked Questions on High Altitude Balloons
category: HAB
tags: [HAB, FAA, FAR101]
permalink: /HAB/HABFAQ.html
---

I have flown high altitude balloons now for nearly 10 years and over the years I have done a number of presentations and even teach a course at Iowa State University on the subject.  Therefore I have had a number of questions asked about how High Altitude Balloons (HAB) behave, questions about the rules and other general questions.  This FAQ is a collection of questions and the answers I typically give.

Disclaimer
----------
The views and opinions in this FAQ is mine and mine alone.  None of the views or opinions in this are those of the Stratospheric Ballooning Association, Aerodyne Labs or Iowa State University.  

* * *

### How high does a high altitude balloon go?

There are a number of factors that can affect this including the size of balloon used and the mass of the payload.  Typically though many balloons can reach between 90,000 feet (27,432 meters) and 125,000 feet (38,100 meters).  Many balloons have gone above 130,000 feet, however around 130,000 to 135,000 is usually the theoretical maximum for most latex based balloons.  

### How far does a high altitude balloon go?

Again, a number of factors affect this.  Typically though most balloons will travel between 30-90 miles from it's launch point.  If the winds however are strong, this can easily increase to 120 or more miles.  In addition, a number of balloons have been launched that was designed to float at altitude.  These floaters have been able to travel completely around the globe even!

### What is the material used for the balloon?

Most high altitude balloons use a latex material for the balloon.  As these balloons rise up, they expand until they finally burst and the payload returns to Earth.  Some groups, researchers and NASA also use plastic balloons which do not burst and can remain at altitude for extended periods of time.

### How big of a payload can I send up?

There is no set size limit but the FAA does have rules on the weight of these payloads.  Typically this is 6 lbs, but if you fly more than one payload you can fly up to 12 lbs.  

### Can I use a cell phone to track my payload and send data?

The short answer to this is no.  The long answer is that while the FAA does not have any rules prohibiting this, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) does.  Specifically Title 47, Chapter 1, Part 22, Subpart H, Section 22.925.  
> Cellular telephones installed in or carried aboard airplanes, balloons or any other type of aircraft must not be operated while such aircraft are airborne (not touching the ground). When any aircraft leaves the ground, all cellular telephones on board that aircraft must be turned off. 
Notice that it does specifically state balloons, although it does not specify if the balloon is a high altitude balloon or a hot air balloon.  Some groups do use cell phones, but they make sure the phone is only operational on the ground and in that case, it would be ok.  Generally though, I do not advise the use of cellular phones on HAB flights.
